In general, native bee decline is difficult to document due to the lack of historic records. However, Vermont is unique in that it has one of the best historic collections of bumble bee species dating back to 1915 (Vermont Center for Ecostudies unpub. data). Surveys conducted 2012-2014 by the Vermont Center of Ecostudies confirmed that over half of our state's native bumble bee species are in decline. As a result of this work, in 2015, three bumble bee species were listed as either state threatened or state endangered (CITE). One of these species, the Rusty Patch Bumble Bee (*bombus afinis*), gained national recognition in 2016 and became the first federally endangered bumble bee. Among the many threats to our native bees, pathogens are a serious concern.  Many have recognized the gap in our knowledge of the interactions of multiple pathogens (CITE). The study I propose will examine this understudied area and contribute to our knowledge of the multiple threats affecting our native pollinators.  



In 2014 and 2015, I assisted in a survey of RNA viruses in native bumble bees across Vermont. This work was funded by a Centennial Pollinator Fellowship awarded to Samantha Alger. This survey provided the first documentation of deformed wing virus (DWV) and black queen cell virus (BQCV) in Vermont bumble bees. Through this work, we found evidence for disease spillover from managed honey bees into wild bumble bees: bumble bees were more likely to be infected and had higher viral loads when they were caught near a honey bee apiary. We also found differences in viral prevalence between bee species. Most interesting to me, I reanalyzed these data and found seasonal differences between one virus of interest, Black Queen Cell Virus (BQCV). In the bumble bees, this virus peaked in (LATE SUMMER- SAY MORE HERE) (Fig. 1). To my knowledge, this became the first evidence of seasonal variation in RNA viruses among bumble bees. To fully understand this variation, more work needed to be done. In the summer of 2016, I revisted 5 of the field sites at 4 different time points throughout the summer. For each time point, I collected over 100 bumble bees of two focal species and three castes as well as conducted species abundance surveys. These specimens are now safely stored in our -80 freezer awaiting analysis. The work I propose here is to analyze these specimens for 3 different RNA viruses, two Nosema species… blah blah blah…...